Owt fer nowt and tuppence change

owt, n. (colloq.) something, anything
nowt, n. (colloq.) nothing
tuppence, n. (arch.) two pence

"Something for nothing, and more besides"


As we all know, the "FOSS" in "FOSS4G" stands for "free and open-source 
software".

Open-source advocates often rightly stress that the "free" in "FOSS" means 
"free" as in "free speech", not "free" as in "free beer". The two meanings of 
"free" are often made clear by explicitly using the two words "libre" (free as 
in speech) and "gratis" (free as in beer). Open-source advocates often rightly 
concentrate on "libre".

Open-source software is "libre" because there are no restrictions. You are 
free to do with it what you want. Use it to make money. It doesn't do what you 
need? Change it. The "open source" of the software makes this possible.

But here's the thing:

"Free beer" is underrated.

People like free beer. It's beer, and, which I think is the key point here, 
it's free. It's something for nothing. Owt fer nowt.

"Gratis" is what drives uptake of open-source software: to take two examples 
from my neck of the woods, NNPA migrated to QGIS, Newcastle City Council have 
done the same - driven by saving public money. We were not driven by the fact 
that QGIS was "libre", but because it was "gratis". It's something for 
nothing. Owt fer nowt.

As a rule, though - alas! - free beer is not free: tonight's free beer has 
been paid for by our fabulous sponsors (thank you), and by you, our fabulous 
delegates (thank you).

That so much is done without money is astonishing, thanks to the enthusiasm 
and commitment of contributors. But without money, many things would simply be 
impossible, such as conferences like this and, more importantly, the 
enterprise-grade performance and stability we enjoy in FOSS4G software such as 
PostGIS, GeoServer, and QGIS.

So, to quote Bob Geldof:

JUST GIVE US YER FOSSIN' MONEY

You can do this in many ways:

- donate
- pay for a feature or a fix (NNPA paid for an interface between QGIS and our 
                              planning application software)
- contribute to a crowdfund (this got us layer effects in QGIS - h/t Nyall 
                             Dawson - essential in the techniques Charley and 
                             Tom will talk about tomorrow)
- become a patron (Regina Obe on Patreon - maintaining, developing, and 
                   documenting PostGIS)
- take out a support contract with one of the amazing companies who offer them 
  *and who contribute back to the open-source projects* (NNPA do this)
- sponsor (UK National Parks have jointly done this)

This money drives quality and professional output. It pays for features via 
grants, and for professional bugfixing. Give what you can, if you can.

But you don't *have* to give anything. You can still get owt fer nowt. But if 
you don't pay, owt fer nowt is all ye get. You don't get to complain or 
demand, or expect. Complaints, demands, and expectations are tuppence change. 
If you want to demand or complain, pay a developer. If not, approach things 
differently:
 
 - don't complain, contribute
 - don't demand, discuss
 - don't expect, engage

If you want owt fer nowt, ye divven' get tuppence change.
